[Release Guide] Document Pre-Planning (#720)
submariner-io/submariner-website: src/content/development/contribution-guide/_index.en.md

To be expanded

#### Planning

The week before a new release cycle starts is dedicated to planning the release.

> Planning accounts for [epics], [tasks] and [bugs] which we intend to handle in the next version.

Reviewer: Twitching a bit at the lack of serial comma but it's fine. It doesn't add ambiguity here, which is I guess why it might be a blocker.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serial_comma#Arguments_for_and_against

> Planning accounts for [epics], [tasks] and [bugs] which we intend to handle in the next version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Planning covers the [epics], [tasks] and [bugs] which are targeted for the next release version.
```

Planning meetings will be held, focusing on the [Backlog board].

##### Inclusion Criteria

For a [task] or [epic] to be eligible for the next version, it needs to fulfill these requirements:

* Be part of the [Backlog board].
* Have a `next-version-candidate` label.
* Have a description detailing **what** the issue is and optionally **how** it's going to be solved.
* Have an appropriate sizing label, according to the amount of work expected for a single person to completely deliver the task:
  * *Small*: Work is contained in one sprint and is expected to take less than half the sprint.
  * *Medium*: Work is contained in one sprint and is expected to take most of the sprint.
  * *Large*: Work is contained within a release (two-three sprints).

>   * *Extra-Large* = Work can't be contained within a release and would span multiple releases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * *Extra-Large*: Work can't be contained within a release and would span multiple releases.
```

* Any *Large* or *Extra-Large* task must be converted to an [epic].

> * In case of an [epic]:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* In case of an [epic], it should:
```

>   * Be an issue in the [enhancements] project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Have a corresponding issue in the [enhancements] project.
```

  * Adhere to the [epic template].

>   * Have a high level break down of the **expected** work, corresponding to the "Definition of Done".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Have a high-level break down of the **expected** work, corresponding to the "Definition of Done".
```

>   * Have a high level break down of the **expected** work, corresponding to the "Definition of Done".

Reviewer 2: Maybe a nit but do we need this bolded/emphasized?

```suggestion
  * Have a high level break down of the expected work, corresponding to the "Definition of Done".
```

##### Planning Meetings

> The project team will hold planning meetings, led by the project's "scrum master".
> During these meetings, the project team will:

Reviewer 2: The term "master" isn't considered politically correct these days. How about we just avoid mentioning who leads the meeting.

```suggestion
The project team will hold planning meetings to:
```

Author: As I replied to Nir already, this is the adjective form and is totally acceptable - https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner-website/pull/720/files#r832008284

Also it's important to understand who is responsible to plan & lead these meetings

Reviewer 3: This isn’t an adjective.

Reviewer 2: No it isn't.

> #### Pre-Planning

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### Planning
```

> The week before the release is dedicated to planning the next release.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The week before a new release cycle starts is dedicated to planning the next release.
```

Reviewer 3: To clarify that the release being discussed is the same in both instances:

```suggestion
The week before a new release cycle starts is dedicated to planning the release.
```

> Planning accounts for [tasks](#tasks) and [bugs](#bugs) which we intend to solve in the next version.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Planning accounts for [epics](#epics) [tasks](#tasks) and [bugs](#bugs) which we intend to solve in the next version.
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Planning accounts for [epics](#epics), [tasks](#tasks) and [bugs](#bugs) which we intend to handle in the next version.
```

  * *Small*: Work is contained in one sprint and is expected to take less than half the sprint.
  * *Medium*: Work is contained in one sprint and is expected to take most of the sprint.
  * *Large*: Work is contained within a release (two-three sprints).
  * *Extra-Large* = Work can't be contained within a release and would span multiple releases.
* Any *Large* or *Extra-Large* task must be converted to an [epic](#epics).
* In case of an [epic](#epics):
  * Be an issue in the [enhancements] project.
  * Adhere to the [epic template].
  * Have a high level break down of the **expected** work, corresponding to the "Definition of Done".

The project team will hold planning meetings, led by the project's "scrum master".
During these meetings, the project team will:
* Prioritize and assign tasks for the next version.
  * Only tasks adhering to the described requirements will be considered.
* Transfer tasks to the [next release board](#current-release-board) according to the capacity of the team to deliver it.
* Remove the `next-version-candidate` label from transferred tasks.

> By the end of the pre-planning week, the project team should have a backlog of tasks and can commence working on the design phase.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
By the end of the planning week, the project team should have a backlog of epics and tasks and can commence working on the design phase.
```

#### Pre-Planning

The week before the release is dedicated to planning the next release.
Planning accounts for [tasks](#tasks) and [bugs](#bugs) which we intend to solve in the next version.
Planning meetings will be held, focusing on the [Backlog board].

For a [task](#tasks) to be eligible for the next version, it needs to fulfill these requirements:

* Be part of the [Backlog board].
* Have a `next-version-candidate` label.

> * Have a description detailing **what** is the issue and optionally **how** is it going to be solved.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Have a description detailing **what** the issue is and optionally **how** is it going to be solved.
```

> * Have an apropriate sizing label, according to amount of work expected for a single person to completely deliver the task:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Have an appropriate sizing label, according to the amount of work expected for a single person to completely deliver the task:
```

  * *Small*: Work is contained in one sprint and is expected to take less than half the sprint.
  * *Medium*: Work is contained in one sprint and is expected to take most of the sprint.
  * *Large*: Work is contained within a release (two-three sprints).

>   * *Extra-Large* = Work can't be contained within a release and would span multiple releases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * *Extra-Large* = Work can't be contained within a release and would span multiple releases (or require multiple contributors, if it can be split up appropriately).
```

(this might seem obvious but I think it should be spelled out).

Author: I don't mind adding the explanation but generally sizing is for 1 person (obviously we can have more than one person working on it).
Perhaps it's better to add it on L70?

Author: @skitt ?

Reviewer 3: OK, the introduction to the list of bullet points should be sufficient.

* Any *Large* or *Extra-Large* task must be converted to an [epic](#epics).
* In case of an [epic](#epics):
  * Be an issue in the [enhancements] project.
  * Adhere to the [epic template].
  * Have a high level break down of the **expected** work, corresponding to the "Definition of Done".

> The project team will hold planning meetings, led by the project's "scrum master".

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The project team will hold planning meetings, led by the project's "scrum lead".
```

Reviewer 5: https://www.redhat.com/en/blog/making-open-source-more-inclusive-eradicating-problematic-language

Author: This is the adjective form..
> adjective:
> 
>  master
> 
>     1.
>     having or showing very great skill or proficiency.

It is also how it's referred to on scrum.org - https://www.scrum.org/resources/what-is-a-scrum-master

Reviewer 5: @mkolesnik I know the term, but have you seen https://www.redhat.com/en/blog/making-open-source-more-inclusive-eradicating-problematic-language?

Author: @nyechiel yes i have and this is referring to the noun form of the word not the adjective, unless "masterchef" is also getting rebranded as "mainchef"?

Reviewer 3: I don’t understand how this can be considered an adjective; “scrum master” is a noun group with two nouns, there’s no adjective there.

During these meetings, the project team will:

* Prioritize and assign tasks for the next version.
  * Only tasks adhering to the described requirements will be considered.

> * Transfer tasks to the [next release board](#current-release-board) according to the capacity of the team to deliver it.

Reviewer 3: Shouldn’t we leave tasks on the backlog, and move tasks to the next release board as people start working on them? That’s one of the purposes of a prioritized backlog.

Reviewer 3: In the context of capacity planning, this was discussed in the weekly call; the goal here is to have a per-release backlog separate from the main backlog, because a single backlog hasn’t worked for us so far.

Author: I think we need good criteria here but perhaps what we can do is have epics all tracked on the "release board" while other tasks (bugs, small-medium tasks) can be on the general backlog and moved as you say "per demand".

However I don't know if people will be comfortable working with two boards like this (you know we're all lazy lol), so we can try and see.

If you're fine with this idea I'd like to get feedback from the rest of the team as well.

I do think epics must be pre-planned as the EPs will take quite a while to flesh out, and doing them throughout the release (with intention to incorporate into the release itself) hasn't worked well.

Author: Latest commit should address this, let me know if it's not clear enough

* Remove the `next-version-candidate` label from transferred tasks.

> By the end of the pre-planning week, the project team should have a backlog of tasks and can commence working on the design phase.

Reviewer 6: I might have missed it, do we have notes on the process to pick up new priority epics (or unplanned tasks with higher priority) in the middle of a cycle?

Reviewer 5: I am not sure if we have it captured, but I think we need to account for:

1. An urgent bug coming from a user in the middle of a sprint
2. A new feature request or unplanned chunk of work in the middle of a sprint

The first case is tricky. I don't know if we want to document something like this, but we really need to acknowledge that there will be bugs and people need to reserve ~20% time for these.

The second case is something we need to be very clear on IMHO; after planning is done, we should avoid adding any unplanned feature work, because there is a cost for doing so. If you think something is really important, I think it should be discussed during sprint boundary day (when reviewing the board before a new sprint) and agree that this is important enough to focus on (and potentially changing other priorities). https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner-website/pull/717/ mentions "Moving epics back to the Backlog, in case they're de-prioritized" under the Grooming call, but maybe we can reward that because this should not be limited to epics only.

@mkolesnik @Jaanki

Author: Yes I will add capacity considerations to the doc, I was just thinking about it yesterday.

This section I feel is the heaviest in detail, perhaps I'll restructure it a bit..

Anyhow regarding unplanned work it has indeed been considered and (will be) documented at https://submariner.io/development/contribution-guide/#unplanned-work so lets discuss it on that PR (which is not written yet ;))

### Test Days

To be expanded

[Backlog board]: #backlog-board
[bugs]: #bugs
[enhancements]: https://github.com/submariner-io/enhancements/issues
[epic template]: https://github.com/submariner-io/enhancements/blob/devel/.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/epic.md

> [epic]: #epics

Reviewer: This may be a sign that we're linking to the same things too much. Generally, we only need to link the first time something is mentioned in a doc or major-section.
